---
title: "Chang-Hua, Hainan"
heading: "Chapter 46b"
weight: 60
description: "Chang-Hua is north-west of the Li-mu mountain, and is the same as the ancient Tan-chou."
image: "/flags/cn.png"
author: "Chau Ju Kua"
---



Chang-Hua is north-west of the Li-mu mountain, and is the same as the ancient Tan-chou.

The city walls are 14 feet high and 220 paces in circumference. 
- The city was built by the noblewoman Tan-ir
- She made the goblins work for her.
- With basket and shovels, they completed the whole work in a single night.

According to another version, the people were called Tan-ir (pendant ears) because their ears hung down on their shoulders.

Although at the present time no children are born in Ch'ang-hua with long ears, nevertheless the Li, as devout Buddhists, put big rings in their ears, making them reach down to the shoulders.

The country is free from epidemics, malaria, and marshes. The climate is absolutely different to that of China, all flowers bud early in the year and have already ceased blooming in the spring, only the water-lily blooms from May to June. to the
month, and the plum and chrysanthemum follow
The people are
5 silk
(^
gauzes
eyebrows
^),
women
from hunger or cold
(i.
The College was
10 city; it
(1131
was
later
— 1163)
concerning
Minister
ch'ang
iM-
(^
common
people suffers
originally situated in the south-eastern section of the
was again
it
The Memoir (|g)
3^), Assistant Prime
transferred to the eastern.
(^
^
U from the Departmental Capital there is a place
:^). When Chau Ting, who was canonized as Duke
depth of a few
Tan-
called
Chung-kien
degraded to the rank of Magistrate in Ki-yang ",
'^^^
drought in midsummer;
the springs had gone dry during a great
all
and here, on digging a well, water
was found
at a
has not dried up to the present day, and
feet. (This well)
«The Minister's spring» {j^
20 is called the Siang-ts'iian or
^);
as the Pai-ma-tsing-ts'iian or .(White horse well springa
(
it is also
^ ^^ ^ ^);
a shrine called the Ling-tsi-miau
is
Ch5n-an gate
Tan-ir
^ which
{\^ ^ ^ A)-
was raised
she
ying Fu-jon

inside the
dedicated to the worship of the noble-
is
Inuring the sAaM-AM*^ period (1131
to the

the Li villages
30 loot in
it
voyage home.
There
woman
it
well
has wonderfully good water, and trading junks supply themselves from
for the
25
one of the
there are no indigents).
e.,
he passed this place, where
it
No
on transferred to the western, but in the shau-hing period
^ M ^ 7^)'
known
follow the orthodox (Chinese) fashions
(^ ^y\
Fifteen
15
They
do).
was written by Duke Li Kuang
it
The women do not wear
nor do they whiten their faces nor blacken their
marriage and funeral ceremonies.
in their
immediately.
it
simple, honest, and frugal folk.
Chinese
(as
end of the twelfth
J®
(il||^)
rank of an
^ A.
official
Noblewoman not invoked
"*^®
away from the
a raid on the Tan
— 1163)
deity under the appellation of Hien-
coast
(i.
e.,
in vain»).
in the mountains) get
When
much
they believe they have solely to thank the
district,
power of the Fu-j5n.
Some 60
li
west of the city there
sea, a rocky peak shaped like a
(^ j^
35 to the
for
fact
II). The
is
manes of Marquess Chon Li
good wind. The
district
in a big laguna on an islet of the
which the people
lion,
that there
is,
is
(^
call «the
Lion god»
here one of the temples consecrated
%\\
^^^,
where trading junks pray
(g ^), Ch'ang-hua, and
in a southerly direction, one reaches the
has three
cities,
I-lun
Kau-on(^^)^«.
After a journey of
340 U
12*180
ISUND OF HAINAN.
border of the military district of Ki-yang
(^
jf]]), is
*/p
founded on the
Although the
different
|^ ^), which
(^
Li-mu mountain. The
the south-west of the
1,46
capital, a second-class prefecture
the (older city of) Ki-yang-hien ^''.
site of
of K'iung(-ch6u,
districts
be reached by land, they are nevertheless so cut
villages of the wild Li, that one
Hu Tan-an (^
dangero
^ ^
(H
To the south
p
k'ou ('/^
^)
j(^
situated to
is
must go by sea
meant when he
off
i.
Hai-nan) might
e.,
from the Capital by the
to get to them.
That
«Again I passed a great billowy
said:
'
«^
1^)=''.
Hai-
of the district city (of Ki-yang) is the post-station of
,|^),
5
what
is
below which traders moor their junks. There
is
a small lo
pavilion in front of this place for the reception of travellers.
The country
is
The climate
sparsely peopled.
is
excessively dry, while,
g^
(^
rain
They
Li-mu mountain);
a narrow strip (along the foot of the
when
the
is
not normal, for the spring
summer
is
usually
already passed, then comes the
is
15
pg).
cultivate the land without either
manuring or weeding
Wood-
it.
bows
choppers, herdsmen, fishermen and huntsmen must go about carrying
and arrows, as they are always
falling in with
Li savages. The women do not
occupy themselves with raising silkworms and making
and sarongs
but they weave
silk,
Li patterns. The 20
with cotton (ki-pel) flowered coverlets,
men have no occupation, and live simply from hand to mouth.
in spirits,
in the
and have neither medical science nor medicines.
They
all
believe
When some
one
they slaughter a bullock, then, with beating of drums and music, they
ill,
an offering of
one
it
it (jjiE,);
and
this they call
is
make
amaking good luck»; furthermore no
allowed to pass by the door (of the sick person). In their mortuary 25
is
ceremonies they have music ^^-
The country
Ij^
^
^),
ll|^
many have made
The College
Thirteen
li
is full
of lofty peaks
so it has
and picturesque mountain scenery
come about that among the scholars of the
reputations (as able poets)
is
from the
(^
-^ 1^
^^ i
is
some tens of
(here) there
ripples by.
is
At
A.
city there is a
rock with a surface which
is
^
feet
in
circumference so
that
visitors
as flat as the
to make
can sit
it so.
on
it;
a grove of thick, luxuriant trees, and a cool, clear brooklet 35
this spot the
Marquess of Chou
(^
'^)
built
a reed hut, and
over the entrance he put this superscription «untroubled enjoyment» ('I^
The
|Sj
situated in the north-eastern part of the district capital.
palm of the hand, without any human labour having been used
It
(
district
villages of the semi-civilized
^).
Li are few and far between, theirIj^^
ISLAKD OP HAINAN.
dwelling-places being from five to seven
181
The wild Li who formed
made raids (upon the country
Ch6u sent a head-man of the
apart.
li
over an hundred villages, from- time to time
Chinese
of the
The Marquess
settlers).
semi-civilized Li on a mission to
6
of
them
them
to get
to malie
an arrange-
weekly market
0)^*;
after
this
they came
zi
(||
on foot with their goods on their backs and shoulders, or else floated down
on rafts to trade with the Chinese settlers. The district (of Ki-yang-kiin) was
ment
^
for holding a
divided into two districts Qiien), Ki-yang and Ning-yuan
(^ ^),
which,
in the chong-ho period
10
(1111—1118), were united into one, Ning-yiian-hien.
A hundred and twenty U to the east, one reaches the border of the military
district of Wan-an
^). The Wan-an military district is north-east of
(||
^
Li-mu mountain. It was founded
the
in the fifth year of the
the T'ang dynasty (A. D. 631) under the
name
of
Wan-an-chou
divided into three districts (him) called Wan-an, Fu-yiin
15 (|Ft|
^).
In the beginning of the fien-pau period (742)
a department or chou, to a
cKi-to period
(757)
its
Mn (^)
cMwgr-Awaw period of
{j\\),
and
{'^ ^) and Po-Iiau
it was changed from
or prefecture. In the second year of the
name was changed
to that of Wan-ts'iian
and in the beginning of the kHm-yumi, period (758)
it
(^
^),
was once more made
a department.
During the present (Sung) dynasty the two
20
away
Po-liau were done
(Men) of Fu-yiin and
with, and Wan-an-hi6n was called
but in the sixth year M-ning{1073)it
^);
districts
Wan-ning
the whole district) was
(i. e.,
(^
made
a military district (kun), and the name of Wan-ning was changed to Ling-
shui
((^ ;([c);
or Men) *^.
25 trict
at the present time they are both included (in the one dis-
The Chinese
(^-)28.
settlers of this district live
plain and uncouth in their habits, but so law-abiding and
They are
disliking robbery
mixed with the Li and the Tan
and
theft that people can let their cattle
and sheep roam
about unguarded without fear of their being wrongfully claimed.
Their dwellings are mostly of reeds and bamboo, and seldom have tiled
30
Women
roofs.
do not
make
in sorcery
of all ages occupy themselves with weaving cotton, but they
patterns on
(^), and
it.
The
devils, (to
sick take no medicine.
whom) they
sacrifice
ness and aid. After the establishment of the
35
(^ -^ ^)",
cine. In the eastern part of the city
the
their faith
drug shops by Huang Hou-
they gradually came to see the advantage of taking medi-
shon
of
first
They put
an ox, praying for happi-
ship-captain Tu-kang»
(M
is
the Po-chu Tu-kang-miau or «Temple
± ^ M
profound faith prays here for an omen
(|>.),
M^-
Whosoever with
gets a reply. Passing ships182
ISLAND OF HAINAN.
make an
1,46
The annual and
here before proceeding (farther).
offering
tri-
ennial examinations for literary degrees for the three prefectures (of Ch'ang-
hua, Ki-yang and Wan-chou) are
all
held, with those for K'iung-chou, (at
this place).
The native
called Li
tribes of the four prefectures of the island of
(^). The Li-mu mountain
cheering glitter (jj^
its
According
tures.
which
3fe)>
of the island
Hai-nan are
recognizable at night by
is
the four adjacent prefec-
is visible in all
a passage in the Tsin-shu (or History of the Tsin
to
dynasty) referring to the divisions of the land, (this) division, which
wu-nu
the influence of the
(^ ^)
stars Li-niu
Li-wu
the
(^
name
(^
star
;;^), is said to
The dwelling places
(^)
under
Li-mu
(^
(§)
of the native tribes
are situated around this
generally wrapped in fog. The Li themselves only rarely see
days,
when
-^ S)^"-
;p[
five streams,
azure peak
its
There
-^j
^'.
mountain, whose summit rises to an extraordinarily great height, for
autumn
lo
are (collectively) called
the sound of which has been corrupted to
^),
of the mountain)
is
be under the light of the
^), which
(^
and Wu-nii
5
floating as
is visible,
it
it,
were
it is 15
save on clear
in space
(y^
a spring on this mountain which bubbles up to form
is
one of which flows to (the town
of)
Ch'ang-hua, one to Ki-yang,
one to Wan-an, two to K'iung-chou, one of which becomes a big creek (;^) 20
and, with 36 rapids (in
^ ^)
(^^ ^ M)
(M.
rapids (in
(^
its
^ ^),
to the village of Chang-liau
the other becomes a small
course), runs to the village of Chu-yiin
^
{^
Lo-hui-hi6n
^^
and
24
down
course), flows
Ch'ong-mai-hien
^^
creek which, with
each other
its
^). These two
become the San-ho-shui
streams flow into
(^ -^ ^),
which goes to
25
K'iung-shan-hien.
(Those of the aborigines)
are called 8hdng-Li
are called
SMu-IA
live in the
'Wild Li'), those who
'Tame
Li'),
daily,
so
it
is
they remain under one
who must belong
Li
(^) family.
not possible to
chief,
to either the
live
nearer
(to
the Chinese)
and these latter are under the control of
the nearest one of the four Military districts
Li grow
remotest parts of the province
know
{^). The
villages
(ilij^f)
of the 30
their populousness. Neither do
but usually each village has
Wang
its own head-man
Fu (^), the Chang (gg) or the
name may inter-marry. Frequently
(3g), the
Persons of the same family
Chinese criminals seek refuge among the Li. The males wear their hair 35
twisted in a knot, they go barefooted and stick silver, copper or pewter
pins in their hair.
hang down
The women wear copper rings and ear-pendants which
to their shoulders.
Young
girls
when they reach marriageable ageISLAND OF HAINAN.
1,46
have their cheeks
^),
when
and,
finely tattooed; this
the tattooing
to offer congratulations.
buy Chinese coloured
called «emhroidering the face»
draw out the coloured threads and weave
silk stuffs,
sacrifice to the
an hundred
10 (in their country),
(^ ^);
they also
is
neither salt nor iron,
nor shrimps
fish,
they barter for them with the neighbouring Chinese settlers
with gharu-wood, unbleached cotton cloth, tree-cotton, and hemp
for they do not
make use
(Hff^
^),
of coined money.

Their dwellings have bamboo frames. The ground fioor is occupied by
The men carry usually
their live-stock, the inhabitants live in the upper part.

make
gods oxen, dogs, fowls, and pigs, often as many as
a time). As there
(at
their faces ^^
spinning and weaving, for which purpose they
is
these with tree-cotton (tJ; j^^) into single curtains
excellent cloth of (both kinds of) cotton.
They
(|§
completed, the relatives and friends assemble
Female slaves do not «embroider»
The women's work


a long wooden-handled knife (fg) and a long bow (5§
 they do not take them.

They delight in taking revenge and killing their enemies, they call this seizing
a step without

they lay hold of and fetter
the case of a relative being killed,
some member of the family of the (dead man's)
of his village, and, for a fetter, they use a piece of hchee-wood six
enemy or
and in shape
20 feet long
like a foot-pestle.
Then they demand of the
prisoner, before they will release him, either a cow, wine, silver, or a pitcher
«ransom his
to
(^),
life»
the conclusion of a marriage contract they break an arrow in
On
two as a proof of good
25 dances
sacrifice
as they call it^^
and singing.
faith.
When
The
festivals
are held with beating of drums,
a person dies they
always
kill
an ox as a
^'.
Among
(varieties of
the native products of this country the ch'on-shui and fong-lai
gharu-wood) take the
first
rank in the Hiang-p'u
(^
|f )^*.
The mountains are covered with areca and cocoanut palms; there are
30 ponies, kingfishers' feathers,
from Min
(i.
e.,
and yellow wax^^
It often
also
happens that traders
Fu-kien), driven on the coast by storms and having lost
to make
everything in the wreck of their junks, have gone into the Li country
people are travelling
a living by tilling the soiP®. "When Chinese officials or
to the native villages, they can expect perfect security
when they
stop in the
35 houses of (these Chinese inland-settlers).
Hai-nan keep guard
Military posts of the four departments (^fj) of
four quarters (pg |5^), along
outside the (territory of the) Tame Li in the
a
line of
a thousand U. There
is
a road like a connecting ring (between184


A
the posts).
1,46
person wishing to take a trip through this country could not do
so in less than a
month ^'.
When Ma Fu-po
to
(J^ jf^ jj^) had pacified Hai-nan, he ordered potters
make some earthenware vessels {^), the larger of which held several
piculs of rice, the smaller
(the natives), even
mission,
from
five to
two or three
from the most remote
and he gave (these
Then he
who had made
villages,
them
vessels) to
bushels.
By
at their choice.
invited
5
their sub-
this
means
he was enabled to form an idea of the accessibility, or otherwise, of their
nests and caves
bushels,
The Wild Li took the small jars of two or three
(^ ^).
and when asked the reason, replied that they had
from steep
cliffs
and the (forks
of) trees
(^
come down
all
lo
;^) and that they could not
take the big ones, because they feared that they would not be able to carry
them home. By
were deep
in the interior, in precipitous
Among
of Li
this (the General) learnt that their villages
(^)
very common, because this clan
Wang (^),
In the
of the wild Li of the
^)
and inaccessible places
many descended from
first
is
of
1820
their submission to Chinese rule.
Chung- won (3£
name
is
the Li
who bear
the surname
year of the shun-M period (1174) the head-man
Wu-cM-shan
number with a population
^)
descended from the Li. At
(i
^fg*
^]),
Wang
by name, gathered together the neighbouring Li
Wang
(il||^[
^^.

Among the Chinese population of the 4 prefectures, the clan name Li is very common. 

At the present time, many descended from the Li who have the Wang surname. 

In 1174, the head of the wild Li of the Wu-chi-shan, Wang-Chung-Ki, gathered the neighboring 80 Li villages with a population of 1,820 adult males for submitting to China. 

Chung-ki and the various chiefs, in all 81 men, went to Kiung-chou to present themselves and bound themselves by an oath taken in the Hien-ying-miau by stone-rubbing and blood-drinking to give up misdoing and desist from rapine and acts of violence.

The Prefect of Kiung-chou arranged  drawings of their outward appearance and clothing which were submitted to the Viceroy. It showed the natives who wore their hair in a knot uncovered, wrapped the lower part of the knot with red silk, or wrapped the hair entirely in coloured silk, or else they wore little
ornamented bamboo hats. All of them wore 2 silver combs stuck in their hair. 

Some of them wore a short embroidered skirt. Wang Chung-ki was further distinguishable by a blue turban and a long red silk brocade gown, bound round with a girdle.

He himself said that this was a brocade gown which one of his ancestors received from the Emperor for having ceded a piece of land to the Chinese Government in 1119-1126.




Its products are also found in foreign lands. The difference is in their quality.

Its gharu-wood from Kiung far surpass those from foreign lands by the quality and strength of their perfume. 

Those from South Vietnam and Chonla India are not to be compared with them. 

On the other hand, Hainan's yellow wax is nothing compared to that of Sumatra. It is even inferior to that of the Visayas. 

Its other prodcts are mostly like those of foreign lands, with the exception of betel-nuts
and cotton which are extraordinarily plentiful. 

The Cantonese traders look principally to cotton as a profitable article.


<!-- Notes.
10
1)
In the two texts
we
possess of the Chu-fan-chi, the account of Hai-nan appears as an
appendix to Part II. Nan Yfie or Southern Yiie, was the southern portion of the kingdom of Yiie,
and corresponded approximately with the present province of Kuang-tung. Su-w6n, a note in the
text says, «is the present prefecture (Hien) of Su-w6n in the Lei-ch6u peninsula)). For fuller notes
15 on this chapter of our author, see Hirth, Die Insel Hainan nach Chao Ju-kua. Only such notes as
are necessary for a good understanding of the text have been added in the present work. See also
Ts'ien-Han-shu,
6,20''.
2) ((Province (Tau) of
Ling-an». It corresponded roughly with the present Kuang-tung, a
portion of Kuang-si and of Tung-king.
20 Substantially
3)
all
B. C.
On
Gh'ang-hua, in Cantonese Ch'oong-fa, see infra,
the information in this and the
Henry, Ling-nam,
first
paragraph
Hainan
332, speaking of
is
p. 178.
found in Ling-wai-tai-ta,
straits, says that it
(cis
1,16.
the most
dangerous point on the route; the rocks and the currents are so treacherous and the channel
so intricate, that no
ship will go through in the night. These difficulties of the passage are
increased by the state of the tides, which ebb and flow through the straits but once in twenty
25 four hours)).
Ch6u
of Kiau-chi
ira-fel says of
(^
K|[;
which
c(The Great Sea
it:
y|fe). In
it
is
is
the San-ho-lin
south-west of Hainan
(((the
called the Sea
is
Triple-joint-currents»).
The waves
break here violently, dividing into three currents; one flows south and is the sea which forms the
highway to foreign lands; one flows northward and is the sea of Kuang-tung, Fu-kien and Gho-
80 kiang. One flows eastward and enters the Boundless Place
(^E |3^ ^)'
'^^^'^^ ^^ called
the
Great Eastern Ocean Sea.
and coming, must run through the San-ho-liu. If
it. But if on getting into the dangerous
((Ships in the southern trade, both going
they have the wind, in a
moment they
are through
place, there is no wind, the ship cannot get out
35
tai-ta,
4) Ling-wai-tai-ta,
is
and
is
wrecked
in the three currents)). Ling-wai-
1,13''.
I,
13^
— 14* says; (dt
is
M ^
Ocean Sea there
marks the Wei-lO, the gulf
said that in the Great Eastern
a long bank of sand and rocks some myriads of
^ f^ 7^
li
in length,
it
^^ °^^^^ *™®^ ^^^^^ ^^^ ^^ °'^^^^
^tt
(
PJT
going junk which was driven by a great westerly wind to within hearing distance of the roar of
40 the waters (falling into) the Wei-lii of the Great Eastern Ocean. No land was to be seen. Suddenly
leading to Hades
^^-
there arose a strong easterly wind and (the junk) escaped (its doom)».Gonf. supra, pp. 26, 75, 79, n. 2.
expedition to
Groeneveldt, Notes, 25, translating the narrative of Shi Pi's
^)
Java in 1292 (Yuan-shi, 162,i2^-is), refers
through the Sea of the Seven Islands (-^
45
Reef(J| J3
^
This identification
ch'uang
(
fi^)
is,
may
^i|>|
7^
(J^
Ts'San-chou, sailing
— which started from
the Sea of the Paracels Islands) and the
Long
Kiau-chii and Champa, etc.
;*i| Macclesfield Banks), and passing the land of
Wan-li-shi-ch'uang
is certainly the same, and
author's
Our
correct.
think,
I
well be an error for
along bank of sand and rocksa
the same.
to the fleet
(-^
fang
(^), the
^ ^ ^)
two characters are somewhat
of the
Ling-wai-tai-ta
alike.
The
can hardly be186
ISLAND OF HAINAN.
1,46
5) During the Sung dynasty most of the present provinces of Euang-tung and Kuang-si
formed one province called Kuang-nan, divided into an eastern and western Circuit or Lu.
On the Li-mu mountains and the Hainan aborigines, or Li, see pp. 182 183, and infra,
—
note 30.
On these different varieties of gharu-wood, see infra, Pt. II. Ch. XI. Em-me%-c7M,
«Sea-plum gum» may be the same as the la-mei (^^ ^j^)) Chimonanthus fragrans,
Porter Smith, Chin. Materia medica, 60. O-mel-shan-cM, as cited in T'u-shu-tsi-ch'Ong, XX^
6)
5
literally
206, describes a hai-mei growing on Mt. Omi, as a shrub about three feet high with fruit like
the Chinese cherry (Cerasus pseudo-cerasus).
K'iung-cM-ts'ai
or
said
is
by P6n-ts'au-kang-mu,
agar-agar, an edible sea-weed
believe, unidentified.
much used
28,28, to
be identical with the sM-hua-ts'ai, 10
in China. Eai-is'i, literally «sea-varnish»,
SM-hie or wstone-crabsB are mentioned
from Hankow, etc. (Imp. Marit. Customs. II. Special Series,
phthalmus Latreilli and Portunus leucodea.a Ling-wai-tai-ta,
is,
I
in the List of medicines exported
JV» 8),
37 as aFossil crabs. Macro-
7,15 says
they are found along the
whole coast of Hainan and that they are exactly like the big sea-crab or siu-mo (^ffi i^)- I* ^5
is used, it adds, as a medicine in eye complaints.
written by Liu Sfln
7) Ling-piau-lfi-i
j^) during the T'ang
dynasty says
(^
^ ^ ^)
that a hu-fong
(1,1*),
is
(^J
a terrible wind which destroys houses, trees, etc. Sometimes
is none for two or three years, while at times there may be three in a single year. This
appears to be the real typhoon. Certain works quoted in the T'ai-wan-fu-chi, however, distinguish 20
there
between the Tcu-fon^ and the fai-fong, the former being less disastrous than the latter. See
Hirth, «The word Typhoons, J.
G. S., 1880, pp. 6—7 of reprint.
8) See Sui-shu, 31, is, of which this paragraph of our text is an abstract. In regard to the
bronze drums Sui-shu says that as soon as they had cast a big bronze drum they hung it up in
R
put out wine and invited their people to come. Some of the well-to-do sons and 25
their courtyard,
daughters made big hair-pins of gold or
silver, and proclaimed the fact by beating their drum, then
they stored them away. Such wealthy people were known as abronze drum and hair-pin peoples
(SwI
^t W^'
^^^y
Man
chief of the
thereafter to
savages
call
^^** their drums to call their clan together to avenge the death of
who had drums were called Tu-lau. In the days of the Han the great
"'l^"
one of their number. Those
their
(^ ^)
was called Lau-fu-ch'6n
elders (or persons of high standing,
(^- .^
^|)
B^), the Li continued 30
tau-lau ("f^lj
;^), a word
which by phonetic decay has become tu-Um.
On
the
the General
liber
Ma
subject of the bronze drums, the invention of which
Yflan (regarding
whom
is
ascribed by the Chinese to
see infra, note 11), see F. Hirth, Chinesische Ansichten
Bronzetrommeln, 1904.
.
9) Ting Tsin-kung was born in Su-ch6u
35
in the latter part of the tenth century; his
name was
Ting Wei
He rendered distinguished services to the state in various capacities, and
("J" g^).
was made Duke of Tsin in 1022. Later on, having become implicated in an intrigue with the
eunuch Lei Yun-kung, he was degraded and banished. Three years of his exile he lived in a
village in Hainan and five more on the Lei-ch6u peninsula. He died in 1033. Sung-shi,
283,8 40
et seqq., and Hirth, Die Insel Hainan, 15, note 2.
10) Sung Kuan-chi, also called Sung-hien
was born about the beginning of the
(-^
^)
known he did not visit Hainan. The great biographical work called Wan-
sing-t'ung-pu, mentions a Sung Shou-cM
;^) as having promoted literary studies in
Hainan. The name given in the text should presumably be corrected accordingly.
45
Chau Ju-hia was an ancestor of our author (see Hirth in J. E. A. S. 1896, 77—81). He
eleventh century; so far as
{^
^
^
wrote several works, one entitled K'iung-kuan-t'u-king (Jfi
j2E) which, to judge
title, must have been an illustrated description of the island of Hainan. The
date here
mentioned in our text, 1210, is the latest found in Chau Ju-kna's work.
^^
from the
Su Tung-p'o,
or «Su of the eastern slope»,
is the popular name of Su Shi
(^^ ^^) one 50
1036—1101. In 1069 he entered official life. In lOmie was
having lampooned in verse a couple of Censors. Here be built himself
of the greatest poets of China. A. D.
dismissed to Huang-ch6u for
a hut on the eastern slope
{tung-p'o) of a hill,
and afterwards took these two words as his fancy,1,46
187
I8LAKD OP HAINAN.
name. In 1086 he was restored to favour, but in 1094 he was banished, first to Hui-ch6u
Kuang-tung, and afterwards to Hainan. In 1101 he was recalled to Court, but died the same
year. See Sung-shi, 338, particularly p. 12, and Giles, Biographical Dictionary, 680.
or literary,
in
Hu
Tan-an or
5 twelfth century.
Hu
Ts'uan ("j^
^^)
was born
in Kiang-si
about the beginning of the
He
rose to high office at Court and used all his influence to oppose the policy of
Ts'in K'ui, which was in favour of a division of the Empire with the Xin Tartars. Hu Ts'uan was
degraded and exiled, in the
for
eight years in
first
place to Kuang-si, and later on to Hainan, where he remained
a small official office.
On
Court, and held the highest offices of state
10 17, note
the death of Ts in K'ui in 1156, he was recalled to
till
his death in 1169.
Hirth, Die Insel Hainan,
2.
11) Hai-k"6u, in Cantonese Hoi-how,
is
the port of K'iung-ch6u-fu, which
is
three miles
Hoihow is now the principal port of the island.
Lu Po-to, was the General of the Emperor Wu-ti of the Han dynasty, who in 120 B. C.
conquered the kingdom of Nan-yiie, i. e., the present two Kuang provinces and Tongking. He
distant
from
it.
15 received the
victories
title of Fu-po-tsiang-kiln or aGeneral Queller of the waves» on account of his
along the sea-coast and on the sea. Ts'ien-Han-shu, 55,17. Mayers, Chin, reader's
Man., 138.
Ma
Yuan, the greatest Chinese General of the
already more than seventy years of age, he
first
century of our era. In A. D. 41,
commanded an army
when
sent to Tongking to suppress
20 an insurrection. After successfully terminating h;s military operations he fixed the southern
border of China in the present Annam by erecting five bronze pillars, at each of which he
established Chinese
garrisons.
The title of Fu-po-tsiang-kun, formerly given to Lu Po-to, was
Mayers, op. cit., 149. See also infra, p. 184, and infra, note 38.
revived for him. Hou-Han-shu, 54.
The
were two pieces
pei-Tiiau tablets
of jade or of wood,
convex on one
side, flat
on
25 the other, which were used for divination. They were thrown down before the altar, if both
fell with the flat side up, the omen was bad; if they fell with difi'erent sides up it portended
good luck.
12)
These
five
towns
still
bear the same names, which in Cantonese are K'ing-shan, Ch'ing-
mai, Lam-ko, Man-ch'oong and Lok-ui.
30
13)
Po
is
the ocean-going junk used in the foreign trade by Chinese and Arabs. See supra,
pp. 27, 34, n. 2. Pau-t'ou
is
the
same
as the present t'ou-mong
(^^
jf^])'
^ small junk with open
Canton as «West Coast boat». Tan, literally «egg-boat»,
the boat peculiar to the Tanka or boat-people of Canton. See Notes & Queries on China and
Japan, 1,28,107. On the present Li Aborigines of K'iung-shan, see China Review, XIX, 383—394.
19° 12'.
35
14) Ch'ang-hua, in Cantonese Ch'6ong-fa, is on the west coast of Hainan in Lat.
10,8*'. ,See also Ts'ien-
15) This paragraph is practically a paraphrase of Ling-wai-tai-ta,
framework in the bows, and known
Han-shu,
6,20'',
which
is
in
probably the authority on which our author
relies.
On
the Tan-ir Fu-jon,
see supra, p. 179.
16) Li
40
Kuang, an official of the beginning of the twelfth century, died in 1156. Through
he was degraded from his high office of Assistant Prime Minister and exiled
political intrigues
Hainan where he held a small office. Sung-shi, 363,1 et seqq.
century in Shan-si. He attained high
17) Chau Ting was born in the latter part of the eleventh
on
he was degraded for his opposition
Later
Emperor
Kau-tsung.
the
under
honours
metropolitan
who were rapidly overrunning
Tartars,
Kin
with
the
Ts'in-k'ui
of
weak
policy
to the
j^)
in Fu-kien, and later on
place
to
a
capacity
insignificant
an
in
sent
then
He
was
45 China.
Emperor. He died in exile in 1147. For his
to Hainan, whence he continued to admonish the
Hiau-tsung (1163-1190) and given the
fidelity to his sovereign he was canonized by the Emperor
also given by the same Emperor to
was
which
same
the
title Chung-lien or «Loyal and true»
was
a voluminous writer. See for his
Ting
Chau
note
10).
(supra,
previously
mentioned
Hu Tan-an
to
(^
—
50 biography, Sung-shi, 360,ii et seqq.
18) A temple bearing this name
Hainan)) (K'iung-ch6u-fu-chi).
is
mentioned in the 1672 edition of the «Description of188
19) I-lun
the present Pak-lai on Pak-lai Bay, south of Ch'ang-hua. Kan-bn, in
may be
Cantonese Kom-yan,
the
1,46
ISLAND OF HAINAN.
still
bears this name. It
south of Ch'ang-hua, and near
is
Uen-mun Bay on
coast of the island.
S. "VV.
20) Ki-yang
is,
I take
the present Ngai-chou on Po-ping
it,
Bay on the extreme southern
5
coast of Hainan.
21) This paragraph
is
substantially taken from Ling-wai-tai-ta,
1,18.
«Wheu a relative dies they sacrifice an ox, but they
they only eat raw beef. As to the burial, a man goes ahead
of the coffin-bearers throwing eggs on the ground, and wherever one falls without breaking it is
22) Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,8* says of the Li:
do not cry or have a funeral
festival,
10
considered a lucky place for the interment)). Conf infra, 213.
The idea appears to be that the wild, picturesque scenery
been a source of happy inspiration to the Chinese scholars who have
23)
characters siu-pa are understood as abbreviated forms of siu-ts'ai
and pa-hung
(J^
"g") asenior
A
bachelors)).
literal
of this part of
Hainan has
lived in this district.
(^^
^J")
The
obachelorsof arts»,
rendering of this phrase would be athere
are siu-ts'ai and pa-kung, so of the scholars of this district there are those
who have been able 15
to establish themselves (as able literary men))).
Yin
24)
is
the third of the Twelve Branches, and i/u the tenth; in other words there were
two market days in every twelve.
The town is still called Ling-shui; it is a Hi6n or District town.
20
These Tan or Tan-ka were of the same tribe as the boat-people of Canton.
lived.
which
he
period
in
the
this
person,
not
even
Nothing
is
known
to
us
of
27)
28) K*iung-ch6u-fu-chi (as cited in T'u-shu-tsi-ch'ong, "VT, 1880,7), mentions a temple
25)
26)
called Chau-ying-miau, 35
name
U N. W. from Wan-chou. The
divinity there
worshipped bore the
of «Captain)) or aPo-chu)). In 1370 he was raised to official rank under the
hai-kiang. It was forbidden to offer pork in sacrifice to
the Fan-shon-miau or tcTemple of the Foreign god»
it.
name
This temple was popularly
(^
)jj^
J||).
of Sin-tso-
known
as
25
Captain Tu-kang, here
worshipped, was probably a Moslim skipper.
The passage referred
29)
to in the
Tsin-shu
is
in Ch. 11,23^ Conf. also Sui-shu,
The
the star Wu-nti, see G. Schlegel, Ouranographie Chinoise, 203.
the Li-mu-shan here given
C. B.
tion
R. A.
S.,
that the
new
Series VII),
name
On
of
Hainan (J. N. 30
6, note, states on good authority that the aborigines had a tradi-
race dwelt on this mountain; hence the name, which means «Li
is fanciful.
mother of their
Sljia*".
derivation of the
Mayers,
Historical Sketch of the Island of
mother mountain)).
visit to Hainan (J. N. C. B. R. A. S., new Series VII), 57, esti-
Li-mu-shan range as not exceeding 7,000 feet. Henry, Ijng-Nam, 35
478, placed the height of the Li-mu-shan at about 5,500 feet. He refers to the fleecy veil of clouds
which hung most of the time over the summit. Ling-wai-tai-ta, 1,8—9, from which this paragraph
30) R.
Swinhoe, Exploring
mated the highest peak
of our text
is
of the
substantially taken, says= «In the
autumn the sky
azure floating in space, while below are masses of
(spot of)
clear and the peak
is
fog)). It
is visible,,
a
then goes on to say that on
the summit of the mountain, cut off from the rest of the world by impassible gorges and guarded 40
by
tigers
and other wild beasts,
live recluses;
«can
family of the old men's village of the Astor pool?))
it
be,
(:^
Ma
Ch6u
K'ii-fei' adds, that
they are of the
^W-^A-^^^M.
W^-
Tuan-lin quates all that Chou K'a-fei wrote on Hainan, giving as his authority Fan Shi-hu
(i. e., Fan Ch'6ng-ta, middle of twelfth century). Hervey St. Denis, Ethnographic, II, 400— 401.
Wylie, Notes on Chinese literature, 218 mentions a collection of odes of the Sung dynasty 45
entitled KU-t'an-shi
31)
(JSS
^M gs)
The customs and
or aOdes of the Astor pool)).
dress of the Li of the present day do not differ very materially from
—
what they were in the twelfth century. See R. Swinho e, op. cit., 26 27. He nry, op. cit., 882—883,
410 et seqq., and an article in the North China Daily News (Shanghai), of Sept. 3, 1902 entitled
The Lois or Aborigines of Hainan; also China Review, XIX, 383 394.
50
—
Ch6u
K'u-fei (Ling-wai-tai-ta,
whom
our author substantially quotes for the last
part of this paragraph, says in effect that ((there being many good-looking women among the Li
2,ii''),189
ISLAKD OF HAINAN.
1,46
women, foreigners
in olden times
used
to steal them. So the chaste ones at least took to smearing
charms, and later on tattooing was resorted to for the same
purpose. When a girl reaches marriageable age the family sets out wine and invites the relatives.
Then an old woman prickes out with a needle patterns of flowering plants and flying moths and
mud
their faces with
to hide theii-
5 puts in the colour in kingfisher blue; the work
very fine and well done». At the present day the
is
designs tattooed on the faces of the Li appear to be lines and dots, like those of the Formosans.
See
Henry,
op.
cit.,
383.
32) Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,«, from
which
this
paragraph
is
substantially taken, says that the
Li knives were two feet long, with handles of horn over a foot long.
10 of rattan. Eeferring to the Li bow, the same work
(6,6*)
The Li
also
wore helmets
says that they were of wood or bamboo,
and the string of rattan. They were shorter than the Japanese bow, though like it. The arrow was
not feathered. Conf. Swinhoe, J. N. C. B. E. A. S., new Series VII, 79. The Ling-wai-tai-ta,
speaking of the revengeful spirit of the Li, says they call killing a person in revenge atso-yaua
™6aning, like the cho-yau of our
(tt ^^h)
15
—
The same work
mancipation
text, «seizing,
(?)».
most part, the Li are ignorant and superstitious.
When a stranger comes to see them, they do not meet him at once, but first examine him through
some peephole. If he is of pleasing presence and not a dangerous looking person, they send a
also notes that nfor the
slave to spread a mat for him to sit on, and after a little while the master himself comes out and
meets him. After a short conversa tion he has wine served, but in the first place he tries the
20 visitor with some bad-tasting herbs (^S 1^,)> and if he patiently eats of them without hesitating,
the host
he
is
is
pleased, and follows
up the wine with
beef.
But
The Li
the guest refuses
(to
eat the herbs)
of the present day all carry heavy wood-knives in small baskets, long and narrow,
attached to the waist behind. In these they also carry their
23 sary
if
sent back to his people».
and
flint
steel
and a few other neces-
articles.
33)
Taken from
34) Hiang-p'u
Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,s^
or «List of perfumes». This
has been given
title
works on the
to several
by Hung Chu
(»yt :|S). Surg-shi, 205,22, mentions this work, which it says is in 5 chapters, and also one
30 by Shon Li
^). Still another work with this title was written during the Sung dynasty
subject of aromatic substances.
(^
by Ye T'ing-kui
(^
^
One was written in the early part
{^). See Bretschneider,
35) See Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,8*,
which
also mentions
of the twelfth century
Botanicon Sinicum,
1,
149,
J\^s
153.
sapan-wood {su-mu) among the products of
Hainan.
among the semi-civilized Li (Shou-Li) are many
from the Hu-kuang and Fu-kien provinces, a cruel, thieving lot who,
(Shong-
outward appearances obeying the officials, are in league with the Wild Li
36) Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,7* says that aliving
35 desperadoes
though
to all
(^ ^)
Li) to plunder the country».
37) Quotation from Ling-wai-tai-ta,
1,16*.
mentioned previously p. 178. The text states that these
clerical error for rice
40 earthenware jars could hold several piculs of water (;;]<). This must be a
38)
(^),
Ma
Fu-po
is
Ma Yuan
the
is not measured by the picul or bushel.
The Wu-chi-shan or « Five-finger mountain)),
as water
39)
is
south-west from the Li-mu-shan
about 1,000 feet more than the Li-mu-shan,
proper. Henry, op. cit., 478 estimated its height as
or «Seven-finger mountain)) in this Hainan
Ts'i-chi-shan
or about 6,500 feet. There is also a
of this paragraph, all the
the exception of the first and the last phrases
45 central massif. With
rest is a quotation from Ling-wai-tai-ta,
Die Insel Hainan, 29, note
50
2,7".
On
the form of oath here mentioned, see Hirth,
.,,,•„
m
5.
substantially
and head-dresses of the Li occurs,
40) This description of the costume
that the description is based on the
said
not
it
is
but
2,8"^,
Ling-wai-tai-ta,
the same words, in
titles, corresponding to the present «Governor
pictures of the Li. Emg-lio-ssl was one of the
and
General)), or «Viceroy», used during the T'ang
41) Instead of this reference
merly
in the
M-ning period
(A. D.
to
Wang
1068-1078)
Sung
dynasties.
Chung-ki's dress^in^ai-tai-ta, 2,8
Wang
Tsu-tau
(
J
]^ ^),
,
has «for-
head-man
of the190
ISLAND OP HAINAN.
(pacified)
Li villages was given
official
1,46
Chinese robes. At the present time his descendants
grand- children) wear an additional garment consisting of a long silk brocade gown
(^S
(lit.,
ajw)
with a girdle and silver buckle. They say they do so because their ancestor received the like
from the Emperor».
Concerning the dress of the
women wear
women among
their hair in a high knot (or
earrings which
the Li, Ling-wai-tai-ta, 2,8^ says:
knob ^S),
tattoo
their faces,
«The married
5
and wear copper
hang down to the shoulder. Their clothing consists of a plaited skirt of cotton
Though they have neither trowsers nor jacket, the skirt they wear is of
stuff of bright colours.
several thicknesses, for they
it
make
their skirts with four flounces
on by the feet (not over the head), and
42)
On
tie it at
the waist».
these various products, see infra, Pt.
II.
(^1) sewn
together; they put -->